May 9, Kerrville, Texas, getting ready to head
back.
During those years, in the early 60s, some other
memorable colleagues were Charles Wines,
W-Y-N-E-S.
Tall, thin, reserved Virginian. scholar of the
New South.
My second year as a faculty member at A&M, I moved
from the large office, which I had occupied during
that first temporary year, to the third floor
where Charlie and I shared an office for a year. He
was a Thoughtful kind.
Colleague, although always reserved.
Another Garland Bayless. Whose area also was the
New South? He and his wife Mary Evelyn became. Two
of our dearest friends. For all our decades.
His work was always marked by deep concern for
students as well as an abiding diligence in
community activities. Tom Miller, quietly
effective in Texas history, a thorough
researcher,
sometimes said by the students not to be very,
quote, entertaining in class. The department had
grown greatly during the late 50s because in the
middle of that decade, the state legislature
responding to the McCarthy era and the supposed
threats of communism
had passed laws requiring that everyone every
student at a public institution in texas take six
hours of american history and that plus three
hours of u.s government and that all teachers
although who would be certified as public school
teachers in the lone star state must take three
hours of texas history thus there was a an
immediate need to add to the department
the appointments during that period for example
included lloyd taylor and garland bayless
By my third year, I was assigned to an office on the
east end of the third floor of Nagel Hall.
By current standards, it might seem like a
comparatively compact place, but as a beginner,
as an instructor in rank, I felt very flattered.
Under Dr. Nance's leadership, all beginning
faculty members served three years at the rank of
instructor and then three as, a minimum of three as
an assistant professor.
During that time, I benefited from one of
President Rutter's
directives. Apparently he had gone to a national
meeting Where some speaker? Emphasized the need.
For.
Review. Of performance. And reward on a merit
salary basis.
On confidential.
Standard. Mr Rudder. ask the deans to direct the
department heads to submit a list during the fall
semester
of all faculty members in each department ranked
according to their merit performance.
Rumor had it that John Pearson, who led business
administration at that time, refused to comply
with that directive and earned at least the
temporary displeasure of President Rudder.
We rank and file faculty were unaware of that
directive,
but I became learned about it when I was notified
that I had received a $100 a month increase,
a very meaningful salary move for a junior faculty
member at that time.
Another involvement which proved to be
long-lasting was becoming the opportunity to
become acquainted with J. Wayne Stark, that's
initial J and then W-A-Y-N-E-S-T-A-R-K, the
founding director of the Memorial Student
Center.
Future future acquaintance with him would
demonstrate that he was a tireless and always
optimistic crusader for what was best for the
entire institution. He was a self-appointed
campaigner for the fine arts, leadership
development, and had an innate ability to
identify individuals
to draw, whom he would attempt to draw into the
MSC's activities.
For example, if he learned about a freshman who
seemed highly promising,
He would invite that student to his office and
after a chat quite often would assign that student
to be the, quote, aid, quote, or in fact errand
runner for one of the key student body officers.
That would give the promising student a bird's eye
view.
For example,
a young freshman named Kent Caperton,
K-E-N-T-C-A-P-E-R-T-O-N,
who had come to A&M in the mid 60s, from his home in
Caldwell
where he had been president of the student body and
had earned the respect of both the high school
faculty and his fellow students. Someone called
young Caperton to the attention of Mr. Stark and so
Under the, quote, Stark
system, quote, Kent became the assistant to the
MSC, to the student body president. His sophomore
year,
as was usual, he disappeared,
meaning he was no longer highly visible.
because he was working in the, on the, he was
proceeding at the true working level of student
activities. By his sophomore year he reemerged,
by his junior year he reemerged as a student body
leader and then was elected president of the A&M
student body his senior year. 1970-71. The
same thing had occurred a few years a similar
series
of events had occurred just a bit earlier. Mr.
Stark and a few others had gathered to try to
consider how A&M could attract more highly
promising Hispanic students
because it seemed that in the coming decades the
Mexican-American percentage of the state's
population would grow very sharply and A&M would
need to have some of its graduates in that
leadership group if the land-grant school for
Texas was to prosper.
With the assistance of Buck Wirus, the always
energetic director of the Association of Former
Students, the staff of the Registrar's Office
Stark and others tried to identify some very
promising students.
As they said, they went after those young men
with rifles, instead of shotguns, and of the 15 who
were sought, 12 enrolled.
By the time
they became part of the Stark system in their
freshman year
and were aides to many of the key student body
leaders. Again, they disappeared from view as
sophomores, then reemerged as juniors as the vice
president, vice chairman, and or otherwise
second in command of their group. Then as seniors,
it seemed that they, quote, took over the campus
because
Henry Cisneros
became band commander. and Hector Gutierrez, the
commander of the Corps of Cadets, the first
minority individual to hold that role.
A classic bit of Aggie,
true Aggie mythology occurred when
Hector returned back to his home in
Laredo, where the celebration of his appointment
was held in true Aggie fashion at the Cadillac bar
in Nueva Laredo, a famous establishment
led by Porter Garner Jr., an Aggie class of 45.
Another classic Wayne Stark practice
was identified as the green couch treatment.
Quotation marks around green couch treatment.
This unforgettable
encounter occurred after
the MSC director learned that a highly promising
student was not living
up to his potential. and instead was loafing.
Stark would maneuver
the youngster to his office.
After closing the door, he seated the visitor on an
old couch
covered
with notably outdated green vinyl.
Then the
young man received a life-changing, what often
proved to be a life-changing lecture
about the foolishness of laziness, the
foolishness
of failure,
the obligation to serve
and the quiet honor
of service
and reliability.
By the Fairly early in
my A&M years,
Mr. Stark invited me to serve as one of the advisors
to SCONA, S-C-O-N-A,
the Student Conference on National Affairs. Then
a truly notable effort
held about
during the first week of December.
It was a conference for
or more delegates from colleges and universities
scattered all across the nation, particularly
including the notable institutions on the east
and west coast, service academies,
plus
almost every institution in the southwest. The
students raised the money by calling on NM former
students,
Texas corporations,
and their own family friends. The speakers were
always
individuals of high merit and notoriety.
One unforgettable moment in that
tradition came in 1962 when the Vice President of
the United States, Lyndon Baines Johnson, came to
speak to a packed house at G. Reilly White
Coliseum.
His older daughter, Linda Byrd, then a freshman at
the University of Texas at Austin, came over to
hear her father's remarks.
Came over that morning to hear her father's
remarks.
In the era of an all-male student body, the
commander of the Corps of Cadets invited this
attractive Longhorn visitor to be his guest at the
Duncan Dining Hall
where the entire Corps would enjoy her presence.
Since the Longhorn football team. Had just.
Obliterated. The Aggies.
On Thanksgiving Day.
With a runaway score. It seemed appropriate to
repay.
To quote repay the quote. This representative of
the Longhorns. So. In the near the middle of the
meal.
All of the fish in the core.
Jumped up.
And in perfect Aggie order. Yelled I yelled.
Beat the hell out of tea. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They then stared quietly.
At the one young lady in the room.
Who stared? Back at them. as she placed
her knife and fork back on the table, then lifted
her napkin from her lap,
stood up very erectly,
pushed her chair under the table, and stared back
at the now silent Aggie audience.
Then
she yelled out
with her hands raised high
above her head fore and little fingers extended in
each palm
as she proclaimed, hook them horns. Immediately
the Aggies jumped to their feet, applauded her,
and everyone in the audience smiled.
As a footnote, it seems appropriate to add at this
point
But 18
years after this event, my wife and I, almost 18
years after this event, my wife and I attended our
first meeting of the University of Texas Board of
Regents following our appointment
to lead the University of Texas at El Paso.
At a dinner party the first night of the meeting
served at the president's residence in Austin.
We were near the head of the line. And took our
plates. Into the library area of that beautiful
home. And we're about to sit down. When the. wife of
the former president of the United States, came
into the room.
We thought it would be appropriate to go over and
introduce ourselves to Mrs. Johnson. And after
the first formal words, I then recounted this
episode
involving her daughter at A&M in 1962.
When I concluded, she instantly smiled, leaned
over and said, proudly, that's my girl.
Looking back on the
role of the MSC, Wayne Stark with Wayne Stark as its
director, and many, many organizations,
campus organizations tied there, it is clear that
he played a truly significant role in student
development at that time.
Although there was a dean of students in those
years,
it did not then or now seem that that office was very
significant in generating activities which
would
polish the leadership talents of the students.
It was Stark who brought the art and the music and he
and his associates
encouraged the students to become involved and
develop their talents.
In addition, He was an old friend with the then dean
of the Harvard Graduate School of Business
who had grown up in Bryan and was at that time the
only non-Harvard graduate to serve as dean at the
first
institution of higher education created in the
United States. Can't think of his name, last name,
Robert something or other. We'll get it later.
Dozens
of youngsters with maroon and white blood
were admitted to Harvard, to the Harvard MBA
program
simply on the basis of a phone call from the
director of the Texas A&M MS Memorial Student
Center
to that dean
who had learned that a stark recommendation could
always be relied upon as a sound judgment
of high capability and splendid potential.
To a new faculty member of the Corps of Cadets was
hard to understand.
That was particularly so for
A person whose father,
whose cabinetmaker father,
on a few occasions indicated that he thought his
son ought to go to Texas A&M because of that
father's recollection that during the
Depression, A&M graduates, quote, were able to
keep their job while others got laid off.
That view probably was correct
because engineers
and agriculture majors were in high demand as the
country was trying to recover from its greatest
economic failure.
But to this young high school kid there seemed no
attraction to go to a school that was all male
and where every student had to be wear a uniform in
the Coral Cadets for at least the first two years.
After seeing Aggies quote misbehave quote at the
Rice football games A&M seemed, some of the A&M's
practices seemed even more of an anomaly. For
example,